Integrated Project II
Method for Protecting Financial Apps Against Fraud
Course: Computer Engineering / IT
Hello.
This is our Integrated Project II for the
Computer Engineering course at Univesp.
Our project is called “Method for Protecting
Financial Applications Against Fraud.”
Our group is formed by Alessandra de Lima,
Éder Cardoso, Gilson Souza, Michele Silva,
Thaylla Oliveira, Yasmin Narciso,
Diego, and myself, Gabriel Silva.
We were also guided by
Professor Ronaldo Fernandes.
This semester, our goal was to mature the solution,
validate the prototype, and deepen our
research against a daily problem:
digital scams.
To solve this, we used a user-centered
methodology: Design Thinking.
And the first stage is Empathy.
We needed to listen to the community
and understand the real pain point.
The data from our research was alarming.
As we see in this graph, 86.67%
of the elderly we interviewed
admitted they had already fallen for some type of scam.
In another survey, more than 63% of respondents
had never even heard the term
“Social Engineering.”
This led us to the Definition stage.
The problem wasn’t only technical —
it was also the lack of digital literacy.
So we defined clear goals
based on the feedback.
The solution needed a simple diagnosis,
such as “Fraud” or “OK,”
clear language, and a flow
with the minimum data possible.
In the Ideation stage, we brainstormed
flows and messages,
prioritizing non-technical language.
And then we moved into Prototyping.
This was where we directly applied what
we learned in Univesp’s courses.
We used IoT Communication Protocols
to design the app’s API.
Analytical Geometry and Linear Algebra
were the basis of our AI model,
helping us turn words into vectors.
Digital Signal Processing gave us the method
to filter messages,
removing noise.
And most importantly: Mobile App Development
and HCI,
which guided us to focus on usability
with a simple interface, free of jargon.
With this knowledge,
we built a technical pipeline.
The AI receives data, cleans the message,
classifies the text, and as an extra layer,
checks suspicious links using the VirusTotal API.
Now Diego, one of our developers,
will show how the tool
actually works in practice.
Hello everyone. My name is Diego, and I’m
part of the PI Project team.
I’ll start up the application.
We use Docker Compose
to create an abstracted environment.
It’s running. The trained models
are already inside.
Now I just update the application.
Great. Very simple interface.
Here, in this larger box, the user
enters the received messages.
And here, in the smaller field, they enter the URLs.
From there, we simply
send the message to analyze.
Very well.
I will place the first message here
in the main field — it has no link.
I’ll analyze it.
The system quickly —
since the models are pre-trained —
checked it and identified it as fraud.
The user clicks once to go back
and returns to the initial interface.
Now I’ll select another message,
send it again and do the same process.
In this message, the system identified that
it is not fraud. So it’s very simple,
and even the color changes.
We even thought about the color palette
so the user wouldn’t be confused.
Even if the user has difficulty reading,
they will still be able to easily identify
whether it is fraud or not.
That is basically how
our application works.
As we saw, the tool is simple,
but it wasn’t born ready.
The final stage of Design Thinking
is Testing and Iteration.
When we tested the prototype,
the feedback was straightforward.
People told us that our
language was still too technical.
And our methodological report was clear.
The feedback guided us
to adjust the vocabulary
and create more direct messages
without technical jargon.
And the impact of this change was immediate.
The community’s response shifted from
“confusing” to “great, very useful, essential.”
So the solution was validated.
In the end, our Integrated Project delivers
much more than a simple application.
It delivers autonomy.
The Fraud Analyzer is a shield,
but also a school.
It protects the user in dangerous moments
and teaches them to protect themselves in the future.
It’s also important to highlight that the system
only processes the message entered by the user,
without storing personal data,
ensuring safety and privacy.
Our next step is to expand the database,
implement accessibility features,
such as font size adjustments and
high-contrast mode to make the tool
usable by everyone.
Thank you very much for your attention,
and I hope you enjoyed our project.
Acknowledgments: To God, to Prof. Ronaldo Fernandes,
to Univesp and to the UniCEU Jardim São Pedro campus,
and to all colleagues and research participants
who contributed to this project.
Subtitled by Gabriel Silva